AAAS Research Volume 2021, Article ID 9862483, 9 pages https://doi.org/10.34133/2021/9862483

<!-- image -->

## Research Article

## Wafer-Scale Synthesis of WS 2 Films with In Situ Controllable p-Type Doping by Atomic Layer Deposition

Hanjie Yang , 1 Yang Wang, 1 Xingli Zou, 2 Rongxu Bai, 1 Zecheng Wu, 1 Sheng Han, 1 Tao Chen, 1 Shen Hu, 1 Hao Zhu, 1 Lin Chen, 1 David W. Zhang, 1 Jack C. Lee, 3 Xionggang Lu, 2 Peng Zhou, 1 Qingqing Sun, 1 Edward T. Yu, 3 Deji Akinwande , 3 and Li Ji 1

1 State Key Laboratory of ASIC and System, School of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China 2 State Key Laboratory of Advanced Special Steel, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China

3 Microelectronics Research Center, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 78758 Texas, USA

Correspondence should be addressed to Qingqing Sun; qqsun@fudan.edu.cn, Edward T. Yu; ety@ece.utexas.edu, Deji Akinwande; deji@ece.utexas.edu, and Li Ji; nmgjili@gmail.com

Received 30 August 2021; Accepted 9 November 2021; Published 6 December 2021

Copyright © 2021 Hanjie Yang et al. Exclusive Licensee Science and Technology Review Publishing House. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0).

Wafer-scale synthesis of p-type TMD /uniFB01 lms is critical for its commercialization in next-generation electro/optoelectronics. In this work, wafer-scale intrinsic n-type WS 2 /uniFB01 lms and in situ Nb-doped p-type WS 2 /uniFB01 lms were synthesized through atomic layer deposition (ALD) on 8-inch α -Al O 3 2 /Si wafers, 2-inch sapphire, and 1 cm 2 GaN substrate pieces. The Nb doping concentration was precisely controlled by altering cycle number of Nb precursor and activated by postannealing. WS 2 n-FETs and Nb-doped p-FETs with di /uniFB00 erent Nb concentrations have been fabricated using CMOS-compatible processes. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and Hall measurements con /uniFB01 rmed the e /uniFB00 ective substitutional doping with Nb. The on/o /uniFB00 ratio and electron mobility of WS 2 n-FET are as high as 10 5 and 6.85 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , respectively. In WS 2 p-FET with 15-cycle Nb doping, the on/o /uniFB00 ratio and hole mobility are 10 and 0.016 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , respectively. The p-n structure based on n- and p- type WS2 /uniFB01 lms was proved with a 10 4 rectifying ratio. The realization of controllable in situ Nb-doped WS 2 /uniFB01 lms paved a way for fabricating wafer-scale complementary WS 2 FETs.

## 1. Introduction

As silicon-based CMOS technology is reaching its physical limits, two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have been intensively investigated as potential ultrathin channel materials for future electronics. TMDs show tunable bandgap, good air-stability, and high carrier mobility and can be applied in transistors [1 -4], photodetectors [5], computing technologies [6, 7], memory [8, 9], RF [10 -12], and heterojunction synapse [13, 14]. However, there are still many challenges, including (1) realization of large wafer-scale deposition, (2) a controllable p-type doping method for TMD /uniFB01 lms, (3) reducing Schottky barrierinduced Fermi level pinning at the metal/TMDs contacts, and (4) high-quality high-k/TMD interface. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is an e /uniFB00 ective way to synthesize single- crystalline TMDs /uniFB01 lms [15 -17], but wafer-scale deposition and precisely-controlled thickness of TMDs /uniFB01 lms are di /uniFB03 -cult to achieve via CVD. Because TMD /uniFB01 lms are too thin for p-type doping by ion implantation [18 -21], a variety of di /uniFB00 erent approaches have been pursued, including charge transfer doping by physical adsorption of molecules or salts on surface [22 -25], and metal oxides (MoO ) [26] or metal3 induced inversion (Tungsten) [27, 28] of WS 2 through interfacial interactions. However, it has proven di /uniFB03 cult to precisely control the doping behaviors and consequently electronic device performance.

Atomic layer deposition (ALD), a self-limiting process with precisely controlled layer thickness, is an ideal technique to synthesize wafer-scale TMD /uniFB01 lms [29 -32]. Niobium (Nb) has been demonstrated as an e /uniFB00 ective p-type dopant for WS 2 [33 -35]. Halide-assisted CVD and low-pressure CVD have

been utilized to insert Nb atoms into the WS 2 lattice [20, 36], and pulsed laser deposition (PLD) can also achieve p-type WS2 /uniFB01 lms using premelted Nb-doped targets, but without device demonstration [18]. However, neither CVD nor PLD is capable of in situ and controllable doping. ALD has been demonstrated for the synthesis of wafer-scale WS2 /uniFB01 lms with WF 6 as a W precursor and H S as a S pre2 cursor [37, 38]. However, very few works have reported in situ controllable p-type-doped WS2 FETs through ALD [39]. NbS 2 can be synthesized by utilizing NbCl 5 and HMDST in ALD, similar to WS . In addition, the lattice constants of 2 2H-NbS2 ( ð a b c , , ⇒ = ð 0 332, 0 332, 1 194 : : : ⇒ nm ) are close to those of 2H-WS 2 ( ð a b c , , ⇒ = ð 0 316, 0 316, 1 247 : : : ⇒ nm ), which facilitates substitutional doping of Nb atoms into the WS 2 lattice [40].

Here, in this work, we demonstrate for the /uniFB01 rst time the wafer-scale synthesis of WS 2 /uniFB01 lms by ALD with controllable in situ p-type doing, on 8-inch α -Al O 3 2 /Si wafer, 2-inch sapphire wafers, and 1 cm 2 GaN substrate pieces. The growth mechanisms of ALD WS 2 and in situ Nb doping were analyzed, and the doping concentration is shown to be controllable by altering Nb cycle numbers. Plan-view and crosssectional TEM imaging reveals the layered structure of WS2, and Hall e /uniFB00 ect measurements and TOF-SIMS con /uniFB01 rm the e /uniFB00 ective incorporation of Nb dopants. Moreover, both WS2 n-FETs and Nb-doped WS2 p-FETs were fabricated by CMOS-compatible processes from as-prepared ALDgrown n-WS2 and Nb-doped p-WS 2 /uniFB01 lms. The on/o /uniFB00 ratio and electron mobility of WS2 n-FET were up to 10 5 and 6.85 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , while the on/o /uniFB00 ratio and hole mobility of Nb-doped WS2 p-FET were 10 1 and 0.016 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , respectively. WS 2 FETs with di /uniFB00 erent concentrations of Nb dopants were also investigated. Our work, by demonstrating in situ controllable Nb-doped WS 2 /uniFB01 lms and consequently p-FETs, helps establish a path to fabricate complementary WS2 FETs at wafer-scale volumes.

## 2. Results

2.1. Growth Mechanisms. Figure 1(a) illustrates the mechanisms of the ALD process for WS 2 growth and in situ Nb doping. The reactor temperature was 400 C, ° while the WCl6 (99.9%), NbCl5 , and HMDST (98%) were kept at 93 C, 60 C, and room temperature, respectively. One cycle ° ° of WS2 deposition includes 1 s WCl 6 pulse, followed by 8 s purge (Argon, 99.99%), and 1 s HMDST pulse, followed by 5s purge, sequentially. For Nb doping, NbCl 5 and HMDST are used as precursors. One cycle of NbS2 deposition includes 1s NbCl5 pulse, followed by 8s purge (Argon, 99.99%), and 1 s HMDST pulse, followed by 5 s purge. The growth rate of WS 2 /uniFB01 lm was calibrated to about 0.036 nm/ cycle. To realize a controllable in situ doping, WCl 6 pulses were replaced by NbCl 5 pulses, and the doping concentration could thus be adjusted by varying NbCl 5 pulse numbers. Figure 1(b) shows photographs of wafer-scale 400-cycle WS 2 /uniFB01 lms deposited on 8-inch amorphous-Al O /Si wafer, 2-inch 2 3 sapphire wafer, and pieced GaN substrate with good uniformity. Raman spectra of 400-cycle annealed WS2 /uniFB01 lms at 950 C ° are shown in Figure 1(c), con /uniFB01 rming that high- quality WS 2 could be deposited on all these substrates except for Si with di /uniFB00 erent thickness at 400 cycles. In view of this, we use sapphire as the substrate for this research.

2.1.1. ALD-Deposited WS2 Film. At the initial stage, the WCl6 and HMDST vapor were exposed directly onto the sapphire substrates and WS2 layers were formed laterally on sapphire substrates. The subsequent layers were deposited onto the initial WS 2 layer to connect the isolated /uniFB02 akes and form /uniFB01 lms. Considering this, a postannealing process would be bene /uniFB01 cial for improving /uniFB01 lm quality. The asdeposited WS 2 /uniFB01 lms were annealed at 950 C for 2 h in sulfur ° atmosphere. The XPS spectra of as-deposited and annealed WS2 /uniFB01 lms are shown in Figure 2(a). The /uniFB01 ne spectra of asdeposited WS 2 contained two pairs of W 4f peaks, representing WS3 and WS2, respectively. The higher coordination number of W atom in WS 3 than that in WS 2 results a shift towards higher binding energy, with the binding energies of W 6+4 5/2 f and W 6+4 7/2 f being 38.7 eV and 36.68 eV and those of W 4+4 5/2 f and W 4+4 7/2 f being 35.22 eV and 33.08 eV, respectively. Similarly, the /uniFB01 ne spectra of asdeposited WS 2 showed two pairs of S 2p peaks. The positions of the S 2 2p 1/2 and S 2 2p 3/2 peaks for W 6+ -S bonding were at 164.54 eV and 163.54 eV, while the positions of the S 1 2p 1/2 and S 1 2p 3/2 peaks for W 4+ -S bonding were at 164.02 eV and 163.04 eV, respectively. XPS analysis for asdeposited WS2 /uniFB01 lms shows the /uniFB01 lms to be a mixture of WS2 and WS3, and the stoichiometric ratio of W/S was about 1: 2.7. A postannealing process in S atmosphere at 950 C for 2 hours improves ° /uniFB01 lm crystallinity. After annealing, the /uniFB01 ne spectra of W 4f exhibited only one pair of W 4f 5/2 and W 4f 7/2 peaks, indicating WS 3 components decomposed to WS 2 , along with a similar result for S 2p spectra, both without characteristic peaks indicative of W 6+ -S bonding. As a result, the stoichiometric ratio of W/S was reduced to 1 : 2.1, with the help of desulfurization and improved /uniFB01 lm crystallinity. The full spectra of as-deposited and annealed WS2 are shown in Fig. S2. To further investigate the crystallinity of as-deposited and annealed WS 2 /uniFB01 lms, Raman spectroscopy was performed. After annealing, the relative intensity of the A 1g and E 1 2g +2LA(M) peaks for annealed WS2 was much higher than that of as-deposited WS2 (Fig. S3), con /uniFB01 rming the improved /uniFB01 lm crystallinity after annealing. Therefore, subsequent WS2 /uniFB01 lms in this paper have undergone a postannealing process. In addition, when increasing WS 2 /uniFB01 lm thickness from 250 cycle to 500 cycle, the separation between the A1g and E 1 2g +2LA(M) peaks increased from 64.2 cm -1 to 69.5 cm -1 , demonstrating good thickness controllability for ALD grown WS , as shown in 2 Figure 2(b). Plan-view and cross-sectional TEM imaging shown in Figure 2(c) reveal a continuous planar /uniFB01 lm, without warpages or kink formation. The thickness of the annealed 400-cycle WS 2 /uniFB01 lm was 4.6 nm, and a cross-sectional TEM image of a 3.7 nm WS 2 /uniFB01 lm is shown in Fig. S4. Preparing monolayer /uniFB01 lms is very challenging due to the growth mechanism of ALD TMD /uniFB01 lms. From the plane-view TEM and SAED patterns results, out of 259 WS 2 analyzed grains, the average grain size was 55 nm (details of grain size were shown

<!-- image -->

Figure 1: Illustration of ALD growth mechanisms and characterizations. (a) Idealized schematic of the mechanisms of ALD process for WS 2 growth and in situ Nb doping. The doping concentration could be controlled by adjusting NbS 2 cycle numbers. (b) Photographs of 400-cycle WS2 /uniFB01 lms deposited on 8-inch α -Al O 3 2 /Si wafer, 2-inch sapphire wafer, and pieced GaN substrates. (c) The Raman spectra of annealed WS 2 on Si/Al O , GaN, and sapphire con 2 3 /uniFB01 rm the successful synthesis of WS 2 on each substrate surface.

<!-- image -->

(a)

Figure 2: Material characterizations of ALD grown WS 2 /uniFB01 lms without doping. (a) The XPS /uniFB01 ne spectra of W 4f and S 2p for as-deposited and annealed 400-cycle WS 2 /uniFB01 lm. Both WS 2 and WS2+x peaks were observed, with the W/S ratio of 1 : 2.7. Only WS 2 was observed in /uniFB01 ne spectra of annealed WS , indicating the necessity of annealing, and the W/S ratio was reduced to 1 : 2.1. (b) The Raman spectra of annealed 2 WS2 /uniFB01 lms with varying thickness. The Raman peak separation increased with increasing /uniFB01 lm thickness. (c) The plane-view and crosssectional TEM result of 400-cycle annealed WS 2 /uniFB01 lm and the plane-view TEM result and statistical analysis of /uniFB01 lm grains by selected area electron di /uniFB00 raction (SAED) patterns. A layered structure was clearly observed in cross-sectional TEM. The average grain size of 259 WS2 grains was 55 nm, with the maximum size up to 160 nm.

in Fig. S5), while the largest grain size was as high as 160 nm. The AFM image of 4.6 nm WS 2 /uniFB01 lm is shown in Fig. S6.

2.1.2. In Situ Niobium-Doped p-Type WS 2 Films. Pure NbS 2 /uniFB01 lms were deposited by ALD using NbCl5 and HMDST precursors, and the XPS results of as-deposited NbS 2 /uniFB01 lms are shown in Fig. S7. The Nb doping process is illustrated in Fig. S8 and Table S1. as-deposited and annealed 400cycle WS2 /uniFB01 lms with 30-cycle Nb doping were then investigated by XPS. In the /uniFB01 ne spectra of W 4f peaks (Figure 3(a)) of as-deposited Nb-doped WS2 + /uniFB01 lms, two pairs of characteristic peaks revealing both W 6 -S bonding and W 4+ -S bonding were observed. However, di /uniFB00 erent from the /uniFB01 ne spectra of S 2p of as-deposited WS , a pair of 2 characteristic peaks of Nb-S bonding was also observed, indicating successful Nb substitutional incorporation. The /uniFB01 ne spectra of Nb 3d con /uniFB01 rmed the presence of NbS 2 as well. After annealing, only W 4+ -S bonding was observed in the W 4f /uniFB01 ne spectra (see Figure 3(a)), while W 4+ -S bonding and Nb-S bonding were both observed in the S 2p /uniFB01 ne spectra. The Nb 3d /uniFB01 ne spectra proved the formation of NbS2, indicating that Nb atoms were substituted into WS2 lattice. The stoichiometric ratio of Nb/S was about 1: 2.0, while that of W/S was 1 : 2.1. The full spectra of asdeposited and annealed Nb-doped WS2 are shown in Fig. S9. The Raman spectra of annealed Nb-doped 400cycle WS 2 /uniFB01 lms with Nb doping varying from 10 cycles to 100 cycles are shown in Figure 3(b). From the spectra, the blue shift of the A1g peaks was obvious, especially in the Nb-doped WS2 /uniFB01 lm with 100-cycle Nb doping, which implies sti /uniFB00 ening of the Nb-doped WS 2 lattice with Nb-S bonds [18]. The annealing process was necessary for Nb atoms to be activated and incorporated substitutionally into the WS2 lattice. The plan-view EDX mapping results are shown in Fig. S10, con /uniFB01 rming successful Nb doping of the WS2 /uniFB01 lm.

Hall e /uniFB00 ect measurements of undoped WS2 and Nbdoped WS2 with 30-cycle Nb doping were performed at temperatures ranging from 50K to 300K. As shown in Figure 3(c), the carrier type of undoped WS 2 was electrons, while the carrier type of Nb-doped WS 2 /uniFB01 lm was holes, con/uniFB01 rming the e /uniFB00 ective Nb-substitutional doping. The hall mobility of undoped WS2 was up to 147.9 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at 50K and 86.3cm 2 V -1 s -1 at 300K, while the hall mobility of Nb-doped WS2 was 12.4 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at 50K and 3.6 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at 300K, respectively. The resistivity of Nbdoped WS2 was 4 orders of magnitude higher than that of WS2, which revealed the fact that the Nb atom was e /uniFB00 ectively doped to substitute W atom in WS 2 lattice.

As shown in Figure 3(d), the Hall mobility and resistivity of Nb-doped WS 2 /uniFB01 lms with Nb doping of 15, 20, and 100 cycles at 300K and TOF-SIMS of pristine WS 2 and Nbdoped WS2 with Nb doping of 20 and 100 cycles were investigated as well. With increasing Nb concentration, the hall mobility decreased from 12.60 cm 2 V -1 s -1 to 5.73 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , while the resistivity of 15-cycle Nb-doped WS2 /uniFB01 lm was 3 orders of magnitude higher than that of 100-cycle Nb-doped WS 2 /uniFB01 lm. This result implied that 100cycle Nb-doped WS2 was heavily p-doped. Nb secondary ion intensity of pristine WS 2 /uniFB01 lm was normalized to 1, while the Nb intensity of Nb-doped WS 2 /uniFB01 lms with Nb doping of 20 and 100 cycles was normalized as 5.13 and 19.25. The increased normalized Nb intensity implied the rising doping concentration with the increase of Nb cycle number. Both Hall e /uniFB00 ect results and TOF-SIMS gave evidence of in situ controllable and substitutional Nb doping. An accurate quantitative value of concentration of Nb doping could not be obtained due to the poor detection accuracy and low atom collection e /uniFB03 ciency. STEM is not applicable for ALD grown Nb-doped WS2 /uniFB01 lms, due to the nature of polycrystalline /uniFB01 lms yielding only the statistical results within few layers. Raw data of Hall measurements of WS 2 and Nb-doped WS 2 with in Figure 3(d) are shown in Table S2.

2.1.3. Electrical Properties of WS 2 n-FET and Nb-Doped WS 2 p-FET. To characterize the electrical properties of 4.6 nm WS2 n-FETs and Nb-doped WS 2 p-FETs, top-gate transistors were fabricated with 2 μ m gate width on sapphire substrate. The CMOS-compatible process /uniFB02 ow and the structure of top-gate FET are shown in Figure 4(a) (detailed process was discussed in Materials and Methods). ALD Al O 2 3 /uniFB01 lms (20 nm) were used as high-k dielectrics. The equivalent oxide thickness was 13 nm. The transfer characteristic of 8-layer WS2 n-FET is shown in Figure 4(b), with Vd varying from 0.1 V to 0.5 V, while the output characteristics with Vg vary from 1V to 5V. The transfer on-current of WS2 n-FET reached as high as 0.4 μ A/ μ m at Vd = 0 5 V : , and the on-o /uniFB00 ratio was up to 10 . The detailed mobility of 30 tested WS 5 2 n-FETs is also plotted in Figure 4(b). The maximum and minimum mobilities of n-FETs were 6.85 cm 2 V -1 s -1 and 0.32 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , respectively, while the median mobility was 3.58 cm 2 V -1 s -1 . The mobility of over 70% of WS2 nFETs was in the range of 1 to 5 cm 2 V -1 s -1 .

The transfer characteristic of a 4.6 nm Nb-doped WS 2 p-FET with 15-cycle Nb doping with Vd varying from 0.1 V to 0.5 V and the output characteristics with Vg varying from -2 V to -6 V are shown in Figure 4(c). Compared to the WS2 n-FET, the carrier type changed from electron to hole, which proved the Nb substituted for W atom in WS 2 lattice. The on- and o /uniFB00 -current of Nb-doped WS 2 p-FET was only 5 × 10 -2 at Vd = 0 5 V : , far less than that of WS 2 n-FET. However, the hole mobility of Nb-doped WS2 p-FET was 0.016 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , while the on/o /uniFB00 ratio was 10 . 1 For Hall e /uniFB00 ect measurements, the resistivity of 15-cycle Nb-doped WS2 was 5 orders of magnitude higher than that of undoped WS2, and the mobility of 15-cycle Nb-doped WS 2 was far less than that of undoped WS 2 at 300 K. The /uniFB01 eld-e /uniFB00 ect mobility of WS 2 FETs was smaller than the Hall e /uniFB00 ect of WS , due to 2 the in /uniFB02 uence of transistors ' electrical contacts on the underestimation of /uniFB01 eld-e /uniFB00 ect mobility. The Hall mobility was roughly estimated through /uniFB01 eld-e /uniFB00 ect mobility due to the nonlinear dependence of carrier concentration on gate voltage [41]. Moreover, the stability of our process was inquired through measuring the on-current of Nb-doped WS 2 p-FET with gate length varying from 5 μ m to 50 μ m. (Figure 4(c)). The distribution of I d ,sat (at Vg = -4 V , Vd = 0 5 V : ) amongst 132 Nb-doped WS 2 p-FET with 20-cycle Nb doping on the

Figure 3: Material characterization of Nb-doped p-type WS . (a) The XPS 2 /uniFB01 ne spectra of as-deposited and annealed 400-cycle WS 2 with 30-cycle Nb doping. WS , WS 2 2+x , and NbS2 were all observed in as-deposited Nb-doped WS 2 /uniFB01 lm. After annealing, only WS 2 and NbS2 were observed, indicating the e /uniFB00 ective doping. (b) The Raman spectra of 400-cycle WS 2 with Nb doping varying from 10 to 100 cycles. A blue shift of A1g peak was observed when increasing doping concentration, implying the sti /uniFB00 ening of Nb-doped WS2 lattice with Nb-S bonds. (c) The hall mobility and resistivity of WS2 and Nb-doped WS2 with 50-cycle Nb doping at temperature varying from 50 K to 300 K. (d) The mobility, resistivity, and TOF-SIMS of WS2 and Nb-doped WS2 with Nb doping of 15, 20, and 100 cycles. After 15-cycle Nb doping, the carrier type changed from electrons to holes, and the mobility decreased one order of magnitude, while the resistivity increased 4 orders of magnitude. However, with increasing Nb doping, the mobility continued to decrease, while the resistivity started to decrease. The normalized Nb secondary ion intensity of Nb-doped WS 2 /uniFB01 lms indicated the occurrence of p-type doping.

<!-- image -->

same day was summarized. With increasing gate length, I d ,sat decreased, suggesting the fabrication process was wellcontrolled and uniform. To explore the controllability of Nb doping, the transfer characteristics of Nb-doped WS2 FETs with Nb doping varying from 1 cycle to 20 cycles were measured (Figure 4(d)). Nb-doped WS 2 FET did not show p-type behavior but with a decreased on- and o /uniFB00 -current until reaching 15 cycles. When further increasing Nb concentrations, the current of p-FET increased and the on/o /uniFB00 ratio decreased in that the resistivity and mobility of Nbdoped WS2 /uniFB01 lm decreased, which was identical to the hall e /uniFB00 ect measurements. The WS2 FET was heavily p-doped after 20-cycle Nb doping. These results proved the good controllability of in situ Nb doping by ALD.

Due to the lack of dangling bonds at the surface of WS , 2 it was di /uniFB03 cult to deposit very high quality high-k dielectrics. Thus, the PBTI of WS 2 n-FET was carried out to analyze the reliability of Al 2 O3 high-k dielectric. The stress was applied to gate and biased at 5.5 V. DC transfer characteristics at Vd = 0 5 V : were measured right after the removal of PBTI stress at room temperature. As shown in Figure 4(e), after 1000s stress, the degradation of on-current was 3.5%, while

WS 2

n-FETs characterizations

Id (µA/µm)

Figure 4: The electrical properties of WS 2 n-FETs and Nb-doped WS 2 p-FETs. (a) CMOS-compatible process /uniFB02 ow of FETs and schematic of device structures. (b) The transfer and output characteristics of WS 2 n-FET with 2 μ mgate width and the mobility distribution of 30 WS 2 n-FETs. The on-current reached 0.4 μ A/ μ m, and the on/o /uniFB00 ratio was up to 10 . (c) The transfer and output characteristics of 15-cycle Nb5 doped WS 2 p-FET with 2 μ mgate width and the distribution of I d at Vd = 0 5 V : and Vg = -4 V for 132 Nb-doped WS 2 p-FETs with 25-cycle Nb doping. The carrier type changed from electron to hole, and the on-current was 5 × 10 -2 μ A/ μ m. (d) The doping e /uniFB00 ects on WS 2 FETs. Nb dopants varied from 1 to 20 cycles. Nb-doped WS 2 FET did not show p-type behavior but with a decreased on- and o /uniFB00 -current until reaching 15 cycles. After 20-cycle Nb doping, the device presented heavily p-type behavior, indicating the controllable doping. (e) The PBTI of WS 2 n-FET at RT. The stress was set to be 5.5 V. After 1000 s stress, the on-current degraded only for 3.5%, while the Δ V th was up to 300 mV. (f) The air stability of WS 2 n-FET in ambient for 1, 3, and 6 months. The on-current degraded slightly within one order, while the degradation of o /uniFB00 -current was less obvious after 3 months than that of 6 months. (g) The I-V curve of WS2/Nb-doped WS2 p-n structures with the rectifying ratio of over 10 . The inset 4 /uniFB01 gure was rectifying ratio.

<!-- image -->

the V th shift was only 300 mV which was 6% of max-applied gate voltage. The results implied the instability of high-k /uniFB01 lms indeed a /uniFB00 ected the electrical properties of WS2 nFET. Higher quality high-k dielectrics would improve the electrical property of WS2 n-FET [42]. To investigate the air stability of WS 2 /uniFB01 lm, the WS 2 n-FET was placed in ambient atmosphere, and the transfer characteristics were tested at Vd = 0 5 V : after 1 month, 3 months, and 6 months, as shown in Figure 4(f). The on-current of WS2 n-FET degraded slightly, while the degradation was within one order of magnitude even after 6-month exposure in air. However, despite the fact that the deterioration of o /uniFB00 - current was hardly observed after 3-month exposure, the deterioration of o /uniFB00 -current was almost one order of magnitude after 6-month exposure. Consequently, the on/o /uniFB00 ratio decayed from 10 5 to 10 4 after 6 months in ambient. Furthermore, vertical p-n structure based on WS 2 and Nb-doped WS2 /uniFB01 lms was fabricated. The electrical property of p-n structure with rectifying ratio of 10 4 is shown in Figure 4(g), with an ideal factor of 2.3, indicating a conspicuous recombination of electron-hole.

The benchmark of p-type WS 2 transistors is listed in Table 1, including various deposition doping methods. The CVD method could yield the highest I on / I off ratio by

Table 1: Benchmark of p-type WS 2 transistors.

| Reference   | Method of p-type doping   | Growth method   | Controllable doping   | Wafer scale synthesis   |   EOT (nm) | I on / I o /uniFB00 at 4.6 MV/cm   |
|-------------|---------------------------|-----------------|-----------------------|-------------------------|------------|------------------------------------|
| Our work    | Nb                        | ALD             | √                     | √                       |      13    | 10 1                               |
| [20]        | Nb                        | CVD             | ×                     | ×                       |     270    | < 10                               |
| [36]        | Nb                        | CVD             | ×                     | ×                       |     285    | 10 2                               |
| [39]        | Φ m                       | ALD             | ×                     | √                       |      15    | 10 2                               |
| [27]        | Φ m                       | ALD             | ×                     | √                       |      60    | 10 4                               |
| [28]        | Φ m                       | CVD             | ×                     | ×                       |       5.16 | 10 6                               |
| [23]        | CH                        | PECVD           | ×                     | ×                       |      32.5  | 10 4                               |

Φ m stands for adjusting metal work function (Ti et al.).

adjusting metal work function but su /uniFB00 ers from the di /uniFB03 culties of large volume synthesis on 8/12-inch wafers. For ALD approach, wafer scale deposition has been studied; however, our work was the /uniFB01 rst demonstration of p-type WS2 /uniFB01 lms on large-scale wafers, with in situ controllable doping.

## 3. Discussion

For the /uniFB01 rst time, we demonstrated the wafer-scale synthesis of WS 2 /uniFB01 lms by ALD with controllable in situ p-type doing, on 8-inch α -Al O 3 2 /Si wafer, 2-inch sapphire wafer, and pieced GaN substrates with a postannealing process. The plane-view and cross-sectional TEM indicated the successful synthesis of WS 2 /uniFB01 lm with the average grain size of 55 nm. The XPS spectra, Hall e /uniFB00 ect, and TOF-SIMS proved the substitutional doping of Nb. The Nb-doped WS 2 FETs with di /uniFB00 erent Nb doping concentrations were fabricated to demonstrate the controllable Nb doping. Furthermore, the p-n structure based on WS2 and Nb-doped WS2 /uniFB01 lms showed 10 4 rectifying ratio, giving evidence to the realization of p-type WS . Our work realized the controllable in situ Nb 2 doping WS 2 /uniFB01 lms by ALD, which obviated the di /uniFB03 culty of p-type WS 2 /uniFB01 lm and paved a path to the fabrication of complementary WS2 FETs and further applications on logic circuits.

## 4. Materials and Methods

4.1. Material Synthesis and Characterization. The WS2 and Nb-doped WS 2 /uniFB01 lm were deposited on 2-inch sapphire substrate by ALD (Beneq, TFS-200). Prior to the deposition, the sapphire substrate was cleaned by acetone, ethyl alcohol, diluted HF (1:50), and deionized water in order. For Nb doping, a typical cycle includes 1s NbCl 5 pulse, followed by 8s purge (Argon, 99.99%), and 1s HMDST pulse, followed by 5 s purge. To achieve Nb-doped WS 2 /uniFB01 lm, the NbS2 process was sandwiched into a WS 2 process accordingly. Nb concentration was precisely controlled through altering NbS2 cycle numbers. The cycle number of 4.6 nm WS2 was 400. The as-deposited samples were put in a quartz boat placed in the center of Zone I and Zone II, and 0.5 g sulfur powder was placed in Zone III carried by a quartz boat. The samples were annealed for 2 h in a 4-inch quartz tube at the base pressure less than 0.4 Pa. The temperature of Zone I and Zone II were raised to 950 C in 55 minutes, °

and the temperature of Zone III was raised to 350 C ° in 55 minutes. The morphology and structure of WS2 and Nb-doped WS2 were characterized by XPS (AugerscanPHI5300, monochromatic Al K α anode at 9.97 kV and 14.7 mA as the source of X-ray radiation; pass energy was 112eV; step was 0.1 eV, peak /uniFB01 tted using combined Gaussian, and Lorentzian line shapes), Raman (LabRAM, 532nm laser wavelength, 1mW x100\_VIS), Hall e /uniFB00 ect measurements (Lakeshore 8400, van der Pauw, DC,4probes), and HRTEM (Thermo Fisher Scienti /uniFB01 c Talos F200X; acceleration voltage was 200kV; the sample was prepared by Thermo Fisher Scienti /uniFB01 c Helios G4 UX focus ion beam, and a protective layer of Pt was deposited on the surface of the sample by electron beam and ion beam).

4.2. Device Fabrication. Top-gate FETs for WS 2 and Nb-doped WS2 /uniFB01 lms were fabricated through CMOS-compatible processes. After annealing in S atmosphere, photolithography was used to de /uniFB01 ne channel area and was etched by CF /Ar 4 (20/10 sccm) in RIE. Source and drain were patterned by photolithography and metalized by Ti/Au (15/70nm) for WS2 n-FETs and Pt (70nm) for Nb-doped WS 2 p-FETs by PVD (Kurt J. Lesker PVD75). A 20nm Al2O3 gate oxide was deposited by ALD at 250 C. The precursors for Al O ° 2 3 were TMA and H 2 O, respectively. After top-gate patterning, 15/70nm Ti/Au was deposited by PVD.

4.3. Device Measurement. All electrical properties of WS2 n-FETs and Nb-doped WS2 p-FETs were measured in ambient room temperature by the Agilent B1500A Semiconductor Device Analyzer in probe station (MPITS3000). The /uniFB01 eld-e /uniFB00 ect carrier mobility was extracted from the transfer characteristic using the equation μ = ð Δ I d / Δ Vg ⇒ × L / ð WCoxVd ⇒ , and the Cox = 2 656 : F/m 2 was the unit gate capacitance between channel and top-gate ( Cox = ε ε 1 o / d , ε 1 = 6, and d = 20 nm for Al O 2 3 dielectric).

## Conflicts of Interest

The authors declare no competing /uniFB01 nancial interest.

## Authors ' Contributions

Y.W., C.T., and L.J. conceived and designed the experiments. Y.W., C.T., R.B., and H.J.Y. carried out the material deposition, annealing, and device fabrication. Y.W., C.T., and

Z.C.W. carried out the I-V measurements and reliability measurements. S.H. and X.Z. contributed to material characterizations. All authors contributed to interpreting the data and writing the manuscript. Hanjie Yang, Yang Wang, Xingli Zou, and Li Ji contributed equally to this work.

## Acknowledgments

This work is partially supported by the NSFC (62004044 and 61904033) and by State Key Laboratory of ASIC &amp; System (2021MS004). This research was partially supported by the National Science Foundation through the Center for Dynamics and Control of Materials: an NSF MRSEC under Cooperative Agreement No. DMR-1720595. Li Ji acknowledges the support of starting research fund from Fudan University and the Young Scientist Project of MOE Innovation platform. Deji Akinwande acknowledges the support of ARO via a PECASE award.

## Supplementary Materials

Fig. S1: thickness of the 400-cycle WS 2 /uniFB01 lms as a function of HMDST and WCl6 precursor pulse time. Fig. S2: XPS full spectra of as-deposited and annealed WS2 /uniFB01 lms. Fig. S3: Raman spectra of as-deposited WS2 /uniFB01 lm. Fig. S4: crosssectional TEM of 3.7 nm WS 2 /uniFB01 lm. Fig. S5: grain size analysis of WS 2 /uniFB01 lm. Fig. S6: WS 2 /uniFB01 lm images with di /uniFB00 erent cycle numbers and AFM image of 4.6nm WS 2 /uniFB01 lm. Fig. S7: XPS results of as-deposited NbS 2 /uniFB01 lm. Table S1: WS 2 /uniFB01 lm process cycles with di /uniFB00 erent Nb doping concentrations. Fig. S8: schematic diagram of process cycle of Nb-doped WS 2 /uniFB01 lm. Fig. S9: XPS full spectra of as-deposited and annealed Nbdoped WS2 /uniFB01 lms. Fig. S10: plane-view EDX mapping of Nb-doped WS2 /uniFB01 lm. Table. S2: hall measurements of WS 2 and Nb-doped WS2 with Nb doping of 15, 20, and 100 cycles. (Supplementary Materials)

## References

- [1] B. Radisavljevic and A. Kis, ' Mobility engineering and a metalinsulator transition in monolayer MoS2 , ' Nature Materials , vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 815 -820, 2013.
- [2] Y. Gao, Z. Liu, D. Sun et al., ' Large-area synthesis of highquality and uniform monolayer WS 2 on reusable Au foils, ' Nature Communications , vol. 6, no. 1, p. 8569, 2015.
- [3] S. Y. Kim, S. Park, and W. Choi, ' Enhanced carrier mobility of multilayer MoS thin2 /uniFB01 lm transistors by Al O encapsulation, 2 3 ' Applied Physics Letters , vol. 109, no. 15, p. 152101, 2016.
- [4] L. Liu, S. B. Kumar, Y. Ouyang, and J. Guo, ' Performance limits of monolayer transition metal dichalcogenide transistors, ' IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices , vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 3042 -3047, 2011.
- [5] O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic, and A. Kis, ' Ultrasensitive photodetectors based on monolayer MoS2, ' Nature Nanotechnology , vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 497 -501, 2013.
- [6] C. Liu, H. Chen, S. Wang, Q. Liu, and P. Zhou, ' Two-dimensional materials for next-generation computing technologies, ' Nature Nanotechnology , vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 545 -557, 2020.
- [7] S. Wachter, D. K. Polyushkin, O. Bethge, and T. Mueller, ' A microprocessor based on a two-dimensional semiconductor, ' Nature Communications , vol. 8, no. 1, p. 14948, 2017.
- [8] R. Ge, X. Wu, L. Liang et al., ' A library of atomically thin 2D materials featuring the conductive-point resistive switching phenomenon, ' Advanced Materials , vol. 33, no. 7, p. 2007792, 2020.
- [9] S. M. Hus, R. Ge, P. A. Chen et al., ' Observation of singledefect memristor in an MoS 2 atomic sheet, ' Nature Nanotechnology , vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 58 -62, 2021.
- [10] X. Zhang, J. Grajal, J. L. Vazqueq-Roy et al., ' Two-dimensional MoS2-enabled /uniFB02 exible rectenna for WiFi-band wireless energy harvesting, ' Nature , vol. 566, no. 7744, pp. 368 -372, 2019.
- [11] Q. Gao, Z. Zhang, X. Xu, J. Song, X. Li, and Y. Wu, ' Scalable high performance radio frequency electronics based on large domain bilayer MoS , 2 ' Nature Communications , vol. 9, no. 1, p. 4778, 2018.
- [12] K. Myungsoo, R. Ge, X. Wu et al., ' Zero-static power radiofrequency switches based on MoS 2 atomristors, ' Nature Communications , vol. 9, no. 1, p. 2524, 2018.
- [13] H. Zhang, ' Ultrathin two-dimensional nanomaterials, ' ACS Nano , vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 9451 -9469, 2015.
- [14] S. Wang, C. Chen, Z. Yu et al., ' A MoS2/PTCDA hybrid heterojunction synapse with e /uniFB03 cient photoelectric dual modulation and versatility, ' Advanced Materials , vol. 31, no. 3, p. 1806227, 2019.
- [15] C. Cong, J. Shang, W. Xing et al., ' Synthesis and optical properties of large-area single-crystalline 2D semiconductor WS 2 monolayer from chemical vapor deposition, ' Advanced Optical Materials , vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 131 -136, 2014.
- [16] M. Okada, T. Sawazaki, K. Watanabe et al., ' Direct chemical vapor deposition growth of WS 2 atomic layers on hexagonal boron nitride, ' ACS Nano , vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 8273 -8277, 2014.
- [17] C. Lan, Z. Zhou, Z. Zhou et al., ' Wafer-scale synthesis of monolayer WS 2 for high-performance /uniFB02 exible photodetectors by enhanced chemical vapor deposition, ' Nano Research , vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 3371 -3384, 2018.
- [18] U. P. Rathod, J. Egede, A. A. Voevodin, and N. D. Shepherd, ' Extrinsic p-type doping of few layered WS 2 /uniFB01 lms with niobium by pulsed laser deposition, ' Applied Physics Letters , vol. 113, no. 6, article 062106, 2018.
- [19] D. Chu and E. K. Kim, ' Hole conduction of tungsten diselenide crystalline transistors by niobium dopant, ' Advanced Electronic Materials , vol. 5, no. 2, p. 1800695, 2019.
- [20] Y. Jin, Z. Zeng, Y. Lin et al., ' Synthesis and transport properties of degenerate P-type Nb-doped WS 2 monolayers, ' Chemistry of Materials , vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 3534 -3541, 2019.
- [21] M. Li, J. Yao, X. Wu, S. Zhang, and Y. Wang, ' P-type doping in large-area monolayer MoS2by chemical vapor deposition, ' ACS Applied Materials &amp; Interfaces , vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 6276 -6282, 2020.
- [22] H. Fang, S. Chuang, T. Chang, K. Takei, T. Takahashi, and A. Javey, ' High-performance single layered WSe ₂ p-FETs with chemically doped contacts, ' Nano Letters , vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 3788 -3792, 2012.
- [23] F. Zhang, Y. Lu, D. S. Schulman et al., ' Carbon doping of WS2monolayers: bandgap reduction and p-type doping transport, ' Science Advances , vol. 5, no. 5, p. eaav5003, 2019.

- [24] M. S. Choi, D. Qu, D. Lee, X. Liu, and W. Yoo, ' Lateral MoS 2 p-n junction formed by chemical doping for use in highperformance optoelectronics, ' ACS Nano , vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 9332 -9340, 2014.
- [25] S. Mouri, Y. Miyauchi, and K. Matsuda, ' Tunable photoluminescence of monolayer MoS via chemical doping, 2 ' Nano Letters , vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 5944 -5948, 2013.
- [26] S. Chuang, C. Battaglia, A. Azcatl et al., ' MoS2 P-type transistors and diodes enabled by high work function MoOxcontacts, ' Nano Letters , vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 1337 -1342, 2014.
- [27] C. Huyghebaert, T. Schram, Q. Smets et al., ' 2D materials: roadmap to CMOS integration, ' in 2018 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM) , San Francisco, CA, USA, December 2018.
- [28] C.-C. Cheng, Y.-Y. Chung, U.-Y. Li et al., ' First demonstration of 40-nm channel length top-gate WS2 pFET using channel area-selective CVD growth directly on SiOx/Si substrate, ' in 2019 Symposium on VLSI Technology , Kyoto, Japan, June 2019.
- [29] J. Song, J. Park, W. Lee et al., ' Layer-controlled, wafer-scale, and conformal synthesis of tungsten disul /uniFB01 de nanosheets using atomic layer deposition, ' ACS Nano , vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 11333 -11340, 2013.
- [30] M. Delabie, M. Caymax, B. Groven et al., ' Low temperature deposition of 2D WS 2 layers from WF6and H2 S precursors: impact of reducing agents, ' Chemical Communications , vol. 51, no. 86, pp. 15692 -15695, 2015.
- [31] A. N. Groven, H. Mehta, J. Bender et al., ' Two-dimensional crystal grain size tuning in WS atomic layer deposition: an 2 insight in the nucleation mechanism, ' Chemistry of Materials , vol. 30, no. 21, pp. 7648 -7663, 2018.
- [32] A. N. Groven, H. Mehta, Q. Bender et al., ' Nucleation mechanism during WS plasma enhanced atomic layer deposition on 2 amorphous Al 2 O3 and sapphire substrates, ' Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology A , vol. 36, no. 1, p. 01A105, 2018.
- [33] J. Suh, T. Park, D. Lin et al., ' Doping against the native propensity of MoS : degenerate hole doping by cation substitu2 tion, ' Nano Letters , vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 6976 -6982, 2014.
- [34] Y. Zhang, L. Yin, J. Chu et al., ' Edge-epitaxial growth of 2D NbS2-WS2 lateral metal-semiconductor heterostructures, ' Advanced Materials , vol. 30, no. 40, p. 1803665, 2018.
- [35] H. R. Gutierrez, N. Perea-Lopez, A. L. Elias et al., ' Extraordinary room-temperature photoluminescence in triangular WS2 monolayers, ' Nano Letters , vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 3447 -3454, 2013.
- [36] X. Li, M. Lin, L. Basile et al., ' Isoelectronic tungsten doping in monolayer MoSe2for carrier type modulation, ' Advanced Materials , vol. 28, no. 37, pp. 8240 -8247, 2016.
- [37] B. Groven, M. Heyne, K. Haesevoets et al., ' Plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition of two-dimensional WS from WF , 2 6 H2plasma, and H 2 S, ' Chemistry of Materials , vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 2927 -2938, 2017.
- [38] T. Schram, Q. Smets, B. Groven et al., ' WS2 transistors on 300 mm wafers with BEOL compatibility, ' in 2017 47th European Solid-State Device Research Conference (ESSDERC) , Leuven, Belgium, September 2017.
- [39] V. Vandalon, M. Verheijen, W. Kessels, and A. Bol, ' Atomic layer deposition of Al-doped MoS : synthesizing a p-type 2D 2 semiconductor with tunable carrier density, ' ACS Applied Nano Materials , vol. 3, no. 10, pp. 10200 -10208, 2020.
- [40] R. V. Kasowski, ' Band structure of MoS2and NbS , 2 ' Physical Review Letters , vol. 30, no. 23, pp. 1175 -1178, 1973.
- [41] G. Nazir, M. F. Khan, V. M. Iermolenko, and J. Eom, ' Twoand four-probe /uniFB01 eld-e /uniFB00 ect and Hall mobilities in transition metal dichalcogenide /uniFB01 eld-e /uniFB00 ect transistors, ' RSC Advances , vol. 6, no. 65, pp. 60787 -60793, 2016.
- [42] T. Park, H. Kim, M. Leem et al., ' Atomic layer deposition of Al O 3 2 on MoS2 , WS , WSe , and h-BN: surface coverage and 2 2 adsorption energy, ' RSC Advances , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 884 -889, 2017.