## Atomic Layer Deposition of Tungsten Nitride Films Using Sequential Surface Reactions

To cite this article: J. W. Klaus et al 2000 J. Electrochem. Soc. 147 1175

<!-- image -->

## You may also like

- Modeling and Optimization of the Step Coverage of Tungsten LPCVD in Trenches and Contact Holes -
- A. Hasper, J. Holleman, J. Middelhoek et al.
- Formation of Complex Tungsten-Silica Microstructures by Ar + Laser Processing Zsolt Tóth and Klaus Piglmayer -

View the article online for updates and enhancements.

- The Effect of Doping Atoms on the Kinetics of SelfLimiting Tungsten Film Growth on Silicon by Reduction of Tungsten Hexafluoride -
- C. A. van der Jeugd, G. J. Leusink, T. G. M. Oosterlaken et al.

## ECC-Opto-10 Optical Battery Test Cell: Visualize the Processes Inside Your Battery!

electrochemical test equipment

<!-- image -->

## Battery Test Cell for Optical Characterization

Designed for light microscopy; Raman spectroscopy and XRD.

## Optimized, Low Profile Cell Design (Device Height 21.5 mm)

Low cell height for high compatibility; fits on standard samples stages.

## High Cycling Stability and Easy Handling

Dedicated sample holders for different electrode arrangements included!

<!-- image -->

## Cell Lids with Different Openings and Window Materials Available

<!-- image -->

## Contact us:

+49 40 79012-734

sales@el-cell.com

WWW.el-cell.com

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Atomic Layer Deposition of Tungsten Nitride Films Using Sequential Surface Reactions

J. W. Klaus , S. J. Ferro, and S. M. George z

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA

Tungsten nitride films were deposited with atomic layer control using sequential surface reactions. The tungsten nitride film g rowth was accomplished by separating the binary reaction 2WF 6 1 NH 3 r W 2 N 1 3HF 1 9/2F 2 into two half-reactions. Successive application of the WFd NH 3 6 an half-reactions in an ABAB… sequence produced tungsten nitride deposition at substrate temperatures between 600 and 800 K. Transmission Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy monitored the coverage of WF x * and NH * surface species on high surface area particles during the WFf-reactions. The FTIR spectroscopic results demony 6 and NH 3 hal strated that the WF d NH 3 6 an half-reactions were complete and self-limiting at temperatures  spectroscopic ellip-$ 600 K. In situ sometry monitored the film growth on Si(100) substrates ture and reactant exposure. A tungsten nitride deposition rate vs. tempera of 2.55 Å/AB cycle was measured at 600-800 K for WF NH 3 6 and reactant exposures  000 L and 10,000 L, respectively. X-ray $ 3 photoelectron spectroscopy depth-profiling experiments determined that the films had a W y with low C and O 2 N stoic iometr impurity concentrations. X-ray diffraction investigations revealed that the tungsten nitride films were microcrystalline. Atom c force microscopy measurements of the deposited films observed remarkably flat surfaces indicating smooth film growth. These smooth tungsten nitride films deposited with atomic layer control should be useful as diffusion barriers for Cu on contact and via holes.

© 2000 The Electrochemical Society. S0013-4651(99)05-028-4. All rights reserved.

Manuscript submitted May 6, 1999; revised manuscript received November 21, 1999.

ers become increasingly important as device dimensions approache  initial  surface  species  have  been  converted  to  new  surf the nanometer scale and the need to prevent intralayer and dopantand volatile product molecules. The surface reactions selfdiffusion becomes more urgent. Refractory metal nitrides are lead- fter the consumption of all the initial surface species and ing candidates for diffusion barriers because of their high stability atnt exposure results in no additional growth. Applicati In particular, tungsten nitride has generatedalf-reactions in a ABAB… reaction sequence results in atomic considerable interest because tungsten nitride is an excellent barrierition.  If  the  surface  half-reactions  are  allowed  to deposition  of  ultrathin  tungsten  nitride  films  on  high  aspect  ratioactant exposure will not change the growth per AB cycle In ea x * and y * surface species react with the gas-phase precursors. The surface reactions continue until of  th species minate a tional reacta the h layer  depos completion everywhere on the substrate, changes in reactant pressur or total re 7

structures  is  required  for  the  most  critical  applications.  Ultrathin c layer deposition of tungsten nitride was investigat tungsten nitride deposition on contact holes is necessary to preparesets of experiments. In the first set of experiments, tungsten nitride deposition on via holes of multiple level intercon- e performed on high surface area particles to monitor t nects is needed to provide a barrier for Cu diffusion into SiO ce chemical reactions during the tungsten nitride film grow Self-terminating surface reactions applied in a sequential manner observing the W-Fretching mode and the N-H retching can be used to achieve conformal and atomic layer controlled thinding  modes.  In  the  second  set  of  experiments, film growth. 9 7This sequential surface reaction approach has been ide  films  were  deposited  on  Si(100)  substrates  and  examine used to grow a variety of oxide, tride,sulfide,and phos10-14 ni 15 16 phide 17 thin  films.  Smooth  single-element  metallic  tungsten  thindetermined the tungsten nitride film thickness and index films have also been deposited recently with atomic layer control. ion  deposition temperature and reactant exposure. 18 The atomi using two in situ transmission Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy exper iments wer surfa The coverages of WFand NH * surface species were monitored x * y vs . time by x st y st and  ben tungsten nitr using in situ spectroscopic ellipsometry. The ellipsometry measurements refract vs .

The deposition of diffusion barriers is an important processing ch half-reaction, the WF WNH challenge in semiconductor device manufacturing. ion barri1 Diffus temperatures &gt;450 . 2 8 C for Cu diffusion into Si at elevated temperatures.ormal 3,4 The conf stable Cu/Si contacts with extremely low resistance. mal 2,5,6 Confor 2 or other low  dielectrics. k 5,6

Atomic layer controlled growth using sequential surface reactions istwo sets of experiments revealed that atomic layer con ideal  for  precise  and  conformal  deposition  on  both  flat  and  high growth of tungsten nitride can be attained using sequen aspect ratio structures. This method is known to produce pinhole-s  to WFand  NH 3 . Additional  atomic  force  microscopy free films and is easily extended to large substrate areas.  tudies characterized the flatness of the tungsten nitride films The thermal chemical vapor deposition (CVD) reaction 2WF 6 (g) 1 NH 3 (g)  W r 2 N(s) 1 3HF(g) 1 9/2F 2 (g) [1] has also been employed to grow cate  that  atomic  layer  deposition  techniques  should  be  useful tungsten nitride films.To deposit tungsten nitride films with ositing ultrathin and conformal tungsten nitride diffusion barr These trolled exposure 6 s tive to the initial Si(100) substrate. The tungsten nitride film ties were also evaluated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS depth-profiling to determine film stoichiometry and X-ray diffra tion experiments to ascertain film structure. These studies all dep in semico

## Experimental

has been used previously to deposit tungsten nitride. 19,20 Plasma enhanced CVD with WF 6 and NH 3 6,21-23 atomic layer control, the thermal CVD reaction was split into the fol- nductor device fabrication. lowing two half-reactions

(A) WF * x 1 NH 3 (g)  W-NH r y * 1 a HF(g) 1 b F 2 (g) [2] (B) W-NH y * 1 WF 6 (g)  WN-WF r x * 1 c HF(g) 1 dF 2 (g) [3] The asterisks in the above reactions designate the surface species. hematic of this apparatus is shown in Fig. 1. The chamThe stoichiometry is kept indefinite because our surface chemistry a base pressure of 5  Torr. The chamber is equipped studies indicate that there are several possible reaction pathways.  0 L/s turbomolecular pump, CsI windows, a Bayard-Alpert FTIR spectroscopy studies on silica powder. -The FTIR spectroscopy  experiments  were  conducted  in  a  high  vacuum  chamber designed  for in  situ transmission  FTIR  spectroscopic  investigations.A sc 24 ber has 3 10 2 8 with a 20 ionization gauge, a capacitance manometer, and a Dycor quadrupole mass  spectrometer.  The  vibrational  spectra  were  recorded  with z E-mail: Georges@Spot.Colorado.Edu

Figur e 1. Experimental sc ema tic of v uum chamber f or tr nsmission FTIR h ac a studies on high surfara samples. SiO par tices with a surf  ara of ace  e 2 l ace e 380 m 2 /g ar  prssed into a tungsten gnd positioned in the infr am. e e r id a ar ed be

<!-- image -->

Figur e 2. Experimental sc ema tic of v uum appar atus f r h ac o in situ spectro scopic ellipsometrtudies on Si(100) samples. apar atus contains a y s This p sample load loca centr l deosition cmber equipped with the spectr k, a p ha oscopic ellipsometer d a surfe anal sis c amber. ,an ac y h

<!-- image -->

/g) w as prssed into a tungsten pho var iety of conditions.  de position cmber is pumped with either capable of automad dosing of molecular pr or s under a wide te ecur s The ha a 175 L/s dif sion pump bac ed b y a liquid Nr ap and a mec anfu k 2 t h ical  pump  or  twse par ate  liquid  Nr aps  baced  b y  mechanical o 2 t k pumps.  This camber has a base prur e of 1  10 h ess 3 2 7 Torr .

Nicolet 740 FTIR spectr ter and an MCTB detectoro ac hie ve ome -.  T suf f icient  surf  sensiti ty high  surf ce  ara  silica  por ace vi , a e wde (Aldr ic h fumed silica, 0 m 2 38 e -toetced scren (Buc kbee-Mear s,100 LPI, 0.002 in. thic and sus h e k) -pended betw een copper posts on the sample mount. s sample 25 Thi could be r sistil y hea ted to  1000 K. e ve ,

The IR spectr  of the silica po r ecor ded immedia tel after um wder y loading into v uum e xhibited a pr ounced surf ce vibr tional f ac on a a ea tur e tha etended fr m 3750-3000 cm t x o 2 1 .  T his f a tur  is arb uted e e tti to SiOH* surf ce species. The h ydr oxyla ted SiO surfce is v y a 26 2 a er sta ble  and  does  not  r t  dirtl  with F eac ec y W 6 .  7 2 To  f acilita  the te nuclea tion of the tungsten nitr ms, the SiO surf ace w as fr st ide f l i 2 i exposed to 10 r r of SiCl at 600 K f r 30 min. is r action pr To 4 o Th e oduced a Cl-ter nated SiO surf ace car acterz ed b y a strg Si-Cl mi 2 h i on strtc hing vibr tion a   650 cm e a t , 2 1 .  6 2

The surf ce ter inated with SiCl* species wur her e posed to a m as f t x 10  Tor r of NH at 700 K f r 30 min. is r action rults in r ace 3 o Th e es epl ment of the SiCl* species with SiN ino g r oups. 5 H * am 2 1 The SiNH 2 * amino g r oups w er e then allod to rct with  1  Tor r of  F w e ea , W 6 f or 30  min. his  r action  pruced  a  surfe  ter inated  with  F T e od ac m W x * species.  f ew WF A 6 and NH 3 r eaction c cles wr e subsequentlper y e y -f or med on this surf to tr sf or m the SiO surfce into a tungsten Bayar d-Alper t ionizaon g uge. Mass spectometr  anal sis of the ace an 2 a nitrde surf ce .  he  WF i a T 6 and NH 3 surf ace ractions w r e e xamined e e on this tungsten nitrurf ce . ide s a The ellipsometer is mounted on the centr ition cmber al deos p ha employing pors positioned a 0with rspect to the surf noral. t t 8 8 e ace m Ga te vlv es prtect the birng ent-fr e ellipsometer windo frm a o efr i e ws o deposition dur g the in WF 6 and NH 3 exposur es. he surf ce anal sis T a y chamber contains a UTI-100C quadr le mass spectr eter and a upo om ti a ic y gases in the centr deosition cmber is perf med using a con al p ha or -tr olled  leak  to  the  surfnal sis  c amber.  The  surf ce  anal sis ace a y h a y chamber is pumped b  a 210 L/s turbomolecular pump to obtain a y base prssur e of 1  10 e 3 2 9 Torr .

The centr l deosition cmber is equipped with an a p ha in situ spec tr oscopic ellipsometer (Joolam Co. M-44) thacollects ellipso .A. W t -metr ic  daa  a  44  visib   w avelengths  simtaneousl  The  spectr t t le ul y. oscopic  ellipsometrmeasur ments  deter ined  the  rr actie  inde ic e m ef v x and thic ness of the tungsten nitr ms using a Lorz oscilla k ide f l i ent tor model. 32,33 The 88 daa points ( and t C D f or the 44 indi ual wvevid a lengths) w r e ft using tw oscilla r s and the f m thicess. Eac e i o to il kn h oscilla or has a centr ener y,amplitudeand width.  he weak cou t al g , T pling betw en the rl and ima inar r efr actie inde ( e ea g y v x ñ 5 n 1 ik ) and the thicess allo ed the unique deter ation of these parer s. kn w min amet

Transmission FTIR spectrop y was utiliz  to measur  the  F osc ed e W x * species and N * species durg the H y in WF 6 and NH 3 half- rctions.  e ea Th FTIR spectr  wer e rcor ded a t 340 K after vus F a e ar io W 6 or NH 3 exposur es  a  difr ent  temper turs.  Gae  vlv es  prtected  the  CsI  win t f e a e t a o -dows dur ing the r ctant eosur es. he  WF ea xp T x * surf ace species w e er monitor ed using the F str tc hing mode loca ed a  680 cm W e t t , 2 1 .  8 2 The NH * surfce species w e monitord b y obsering the dominant y a er e v N-H 2 strtc hing modes and N-Hscissor  mode center d a t e 2 s , 3400 and 1500 cm 1 ,r especti el y. 9-31 2 v 2

Spectr oscopic  ellipsometr studies  on  Si(100). y -The  tungsten nitrde f lm g r owth e xper iments w er e perf r med in a high v uum i i o ac appar atus tha  has been descrd in detail else. 0 t ibe w her 1 A sc hema t ic of this e r imental  setup  inc ing  the xpe lud in situ ellipsometer is illustr ed in F g . 2. In brthe apar atus consists of a sample loadr 5 min.  his therl anneal w s fllo ed b y a high fr uenc y at i ief , p loc k c hamber,a centr l deosition cmber,and an ultr igh vcua p ha ah a um chamber f or surf ce anal sis.  he centr l deosition cmber is a y T a p ha The Si(100) samples w c leaned with methanol, etone ,and er e ac distilled w er bef r e mounting and loading into the c.  The at o hamber SiO 2 surf ace w as fur her c eaned in vuum by an anneal a 900 K t l ac t f o T ma a o w eq H 2 O plasma disc ar ge a t 300 K.  his HO plasma fullh ydr oxyla t h T 2 y ed the SiOsurf ace and r mo ved surf ce carbon contamina on. 2 e a ti

The sample substr e w as a Si(100) wr coer ed with 125 Å of at af e v SiO 2 f or med by ther al o xida tion.  he Si(100) w f er s w er e p-type m T a bor on-doped with a r istity of es v r 5 0.01-0.03  cm. Squar e pieces V of the Si(100) w r with dimensions of 0.75  75 in. w e used af e 3 0. er as the samples.  highl  doped Si(100) samples w  suspended The y er e between copper posts using 0.25 mm Mo f and could be r s oil esiti vel y hea ed to &gt;1100 K.  e sample temperur e was deter ined t Th at m by a Chrmel-Alumel ther ocouple pr essed onto the SiO urf ace o m 2 s using a spr g cip. in l

To  initia   the  tungsten  nitr f lm  gowth, the  hdr oxyla ted te ide i r y SiO 2 surf ace w as fr st e posed to 10 mT r r of Si i x o 2 H 6 at 600 K f r o , 5 min. Under these conditions, spectr scop y indica es tha FTIR o t t Si 2 H 6 r eacts with the surfh ydr oxyl goups and de osits surf e ace r p ac species  containing  Si-H  strg  vibr tions: etc hin a e.g . , SiOH* 1 Si 2 H 6 r SiOSiH 3 * 1 SiH 4 . fter the initial Si eatment, tungsten A 2 H 6 tr nitrde  f lm  gowth  could  be  perfed  at  raction  temperur es i i r o m e at between 550-800 K. f ew WF A 6 and NH 3 r eaction c cles wr e uti y e -lizd to tr sf or m the SiO surfce to a tungsten nitr urfe . he e an 2 a ide s ac T dependence of the tungsten nitr owth r ate  on F ide g r W 6 and NH 3 r eactant eosur e was eamined on this tungsten nitr urfe . xp x ide s ac

## Results

FTIR  spectr scop y  studies  of  surfc hemistr. o ace y -Sever al  in -fr ar ed  difr ence  spectrrcor ded durng the NH half-r action a f e a e i 3 e t 600 K ar e displa ed in F g . 3.  hese infr ed dif er ence spectrar y i T a f a e r ef er enced  to a tungsten nitrurfe tha  had earer rei ved a ide s ac t li ec sa turtion e posur e of  F a x W 6 at 600 K.  he spectr  after vous NH 3 T a ar i exposur es ar ofset f car ity in pr entaion.  he infr r ed spectr e or l es t T a a show N-H 2 strtc hing vibr tions a  ~ 3450 cm 1 e a t 2 and N-H 2 scissor s vibr ations a t , 1500 cm 2 1 .  T hese r sults indicatha  the NH sur e te t y * f ace species is pr il a NH 2 ima y * surf ace species.  infr r ed spectr The a a also displa W -F y x strtc hing  vibr tions  a   680  cm e a t 2 1 .  T he  spectr a r eveal a gdual incrse in the dominant NH urf ace species tha r a ea 2 * s t is coupled with a cor onding loss in  * surfce species  NH 3 r esp WF x a vs . exposur e.  The  loss  of  * WF x surf ace  species  a ear s  as  a  ne tie pp ga v absorbance .

Figur e 4 displa  infr r ed dif er ence spectrrcor ded durng the ys a f a e i subsequent  F W 6 exposur e a t 600 K.  he dif er ence spectrar a gain T f a  e of fset  to  displa he  c anges y  t h vs .  WF 6 exposur e.  Eac  dif er ence h f spectrm displas the c ange in the infr a bsorbance r f er enced u y h ar ed e to a tungsten nitr surfe tha  had r cei ved a sa ur ation NH expoide ac t e t 3 sur e a t 600 K.  he g ain of T WF x * surf ace species is concur  with a r ent loss  of  NH surf ace  species.  e  loss  of  NHsurfce  species 2 * Th 2 * a appear s as a ne tie a bsorbance ga v .

The nor maliz ed inte r ated asorbances durg the NHand  WF g b in 3 6 half-r actions  ardispla ed  in  F g .  5.  he  loss  of  * e e y i T WF x surf ace species durg the NH half-r action occurmor e rpidl y than the in 3 e s a cor r esponding g in of the NH surfce species.  is beha ior indi a 2 * a Th v -

Figur e 3. FTIR difer ence spectrin the N-H strtc h,N-H a y e y bend,and  W -F x strtc h r egions r cor ded after vous NH e e ar i 3 exposur es durng the NH halfi 3 r eaction a  600 K. Eacdif er ence spectr is r f er enced to a surf  tha t h f um e ace t had earier rei ved a sa ur ation  F l ec t W 6 exposur e a t 600 K.

<!-- image -->

Figur e 4. FTIR difer ence spectrin the N-H strtc h,N-H a y e y bend,and  W -F x strtc h r egions r cor ded after vous F e e ar i W 6 exposur es durng the  F i W 6 halfr eaction  a   600  K.  Eac dif er ence  spectr  is  r f er enced  to  a  tungsten t h f um e nitrde surf ce tha  had earer rei ved a sa ur ation NH exposur e a t 600 K. i a t li ec t 3

<!-- image -->

cates tha  eac  NH t h 3 molecule ma y initiallact with m ltiple  * y r e u WF x surf ace species. In contr he gin of  F ast, t a W x * surf ace species dur g in the  WF 6 half-r action is concur t with the loss of NH rf ace e r en 2 * su

Figur e 5. Normaliz ed inte r ated asorbances f the -F g b or W x strtc hing mode e ( , 680  cm 2 1 )  and  the  N-H strtc hing  mode  ( 3400  cm 2 e , 2 1 ) vs. r eactant exposur e durng the (a) NHnd (b)  F i 3 a W 6 half-r actions a600 K. e t

<!-- image -->

species.  his  beha ior  indica s  a  1:1  rtion  betw en  WF T v te eac e 6 and NH 2 * surf ace species.

The loss of NHsurf ace coer age durng the  F 2 * v i W 6 half-r action e r esults in the g h of  F r owt W x * surf ace coer age. v W hen the  F W 6 halfr eaction rc hes completion, his  F ea t W x * surfce coer age is equi lent a v va to the WF x * surfce coer age measur ed pror to the NHalf-r action. a v i 3 h e Similar y, the  loss  of * surfce  coer age  durng  the  NH halfl WF x a v i 3 r eaction rults in thewth of NH * surfce coer age tha becomes es gr o 2 a v t equi valent to the 2 NH * surf ace coer age measur ed pror to the  6 v i WF half-r action.  hese r sults indicatha  the NH and  WF e T e te t 3 6 surf ace r eactions pr eed to completion a 00 K with suf ient r ctant e oc t 6 f ic ea xposur e. In adtion, ac h raction is self-limiting and terwith di e e mi ates the consumption of the initial surf ctional g ps. ace f n r ou

Infrr ed  dif er ence  spectrwer e  also  ror ded  durng  the  F a f a ec i W 6 and NH 3 half-r actions a700 and 500 K. 700 K, the  WF e t At 6 and NH 3 half-r actions w r e obser ed to be f ter than a 600 K. Hoe e v as t w ever ,conductance limita ons in the high surf ra silica por ti ace ae wde pr evented  a  quantita   descr ption  of  the  r ie  raction  res. ti ve i ela tv e at The half-rctions a700 K wr e self-limiting and ter ed with ea t e minat the consumption of the initial surf cies.  e  inte r ated  aace spe Th g b sorbances f r the o WF 6 and NH 3 half-r actions a700 K sho ed tha e t w t the initial loss of  urf ace species dur g the NHhalf-r action WF x * s in 3 e did not cor spond with a concurt g owth of  H r e r en r N 2 * surfce species. a This beha ior is consistent with eacmolecule initiall act v h NH 3 y r e ing with en mor e  WF v x * surf ace species a 700 than a 600 K. In t t contr ast, the F W 6 half-r action a  700 K occur d with a concurt e t r e r en gain of  F W x * surf ace species and loss of urf ace species. NH * s 2

At 500 K, the NH 3 half-r action w s obser ed to sar ate after e a v tu r emo ving onl y , 60 % of the  * surf ace species. Lar  NH 3 WF x ger r eac tant e posur es did not r ve ad ditional  * surfce species.  is x emo WF x a Th behavior indica s tha  the NH half-r action does not pr ed to te t 3 e oce completion  a   500  K.  In  contr , the  WF t ast 6 half-r action  w s  ob e a -ser ved to consume all of the surf* species rulting fr  the ace NH y es om NH 3 r eaction a  500 K. e  WF t Th 6 half-r action a  500 K ws also per e t a -f or med on a tungsten nitrsurfe tha  had earer rei ved a sa u ide ac t li ec t r ation e posur e of NH at 600 K.  his e per iment r vealed thasuf x 3 T x e t -f icient WF 6 exposur es can consume all the NH urf ace species a y * s t 500 K. he inaility of the NH alf-r action to rt with all  * T b 3 h e eac WF x surf ace species a 500 K indica s tha  tungsten nitrf lm g r owth t te t ide i or a $ -sten nitr e f lms. id i

Figur e 6. Ellipsometr c measurments of the tungsten nitrm thic ness i e ide f l i k deposited b  thre  AB cycles y e vs. NH 3 exposur e a t 600 K. WF A 6 exposur e of 4300 L w as suf icient f  a complete f or WF 6 half-r action a  600 K. e t

<!-- image -->

r esults in no ad ional tungsten nitreosition f   WF dit ide dp or 6 r eactant exposur es $ 3000 L.

Figur e 8 sho s the ellipsometrmeasurments of the tungsten w ic e nitrde f lm thic ness i i k vs. the nmber of  B cycles a  600 K.  he  WF u A t T 6 r eactant eosur e of 4300 L and NH r eactant eosur e of 12,000 L xp 3 xp w er e  suf icient  f   complete  half-r tions  dur g  eac   AB  cycle . f or eac in h The  flm  thic ness  is  dirl  pr opor tional  to  the  nr  of B i k ecty umbe A cycles.  he solid line displa he least squarinear fto the da T y  t es l it ta.

should be perf med at temper tur es  600 K to obtain the best tung tice constant of 2.4 Å obtained b-r y dif r action (XRD) meas The tungsten nitr  f lm thic ness  . nmber of B cycles is ide i k vs u A extr emely linearhe least squarft yields a gh r ate of 2.55 / . T es i r owt Å AB cycle a 600 K.  his g owth r ate ar ees w ell with the  N la t t T r g W 2 y the Xa f -

Spectrscopic ellipsometrtudies of fg r owth. o y s ilm - The de pendence of the half-r ions on the  6 eact WF and NH 3 r eactant eosur es xp w as eamined b y measur ing the tungsten nitr f lm thic ness de x ide i k -posited b  3 B cycles a  600 K. typical  cycle occurd with y A t A AB r e the f lloing sequence:xpose  WF o w e 6 (1-10 mT or r)/N pur ge 1-3 min/ 2 expose NH 3 (1-10 mT or r)/N pur ge 1-3 min. e ellipsometr  meas 2 Th ic -ur ements shon in F ig . 6 and 7 demonstr  tha  the w ate t WF 6 and NH 3 half-r actions ar self-limiting a 0 K. Once a half-r ion rc hes e e t 60 eact ea completion, additional r ctant eosur e prduces no ad itional f m ea xp o d il gr owth.

Figur e 6 displa  the tungsten nitr f lm thic ness obtained ys ide  i k vs. NH 3 r eactant eosur e with a xp WF 6 r eactant eosur e of 4300 L.  is xp Th WF 6 exposur e is suf cient f  a complete f i or WF 6 half-r action. F e ig ur e 6 sho ws tha the NHhalf-r action is incomplete and the tung t 3 e -sten nitr e f lm thic ness deosited b  thr e B cycles is de ndent id i k p y e A pe on NH 3 r eactant eosur e fr NH 3 xp o exposur es &lt;10,000 L. In contr ast, additional NHexposur e rsults in no fur tungsten nitrdeo3 e the ide  p sition f  NH 3 or exposur es  10,000 L.  he surf ce ractions ar com-$ T a e e plete and self-limiting in this r e er or bar rpr esent the egime.  Th s e 90% confidence limits deterd b y the uncerinty in the ellipso mine ta -metr ic daa.  he solid line is intended onl uide the e t T y to g ye.

The f ilm thic nesses measur d in F g .  7  wr e  obtained  with  a k e i e var ia ble F W 6 exposur e and a NH r eactant eosur e of 12,000 L. 3 xp This NH 3 exposur e is suf cient f  a complete NHhalf-r action. f i or 3 e Figur e 7 sho s tha t the tungsten nitr lm thic ness deosited b w ide f i k p y 3 AB cycles is de ndent on the  6 pe WF r eactant  eosur e  fr  WF xp o 6 exposur es &lt;3000 L. In contr , additional ast WF 6 r eactant eosur e xp

Figur e 7. Ellipsometr c measurments of the tungsten nitrm thic ness i e ide f l i k deposited b  thre  AB cycles y e vs. WF 6 exposur e a t 600 K. NH A 3 exposur e of 12,000 L w as suf icient f  a complete NH half-r action a  600 K. f or 3 e t

<!-- image -->

Figur e 8. Tungsten nitr e f lm thic ness measurd b y ellipsometr id i k e y vs. num ber of  B cycles a  600 K.  he NH A t T 3 exposur e of 12,000 L and  exposur e WF 6 of 4300 L wr e suf icient f  complete half-r tions durg eac  AB cycle . e f or eac in h

<!-- image -->

ur ements. he linear g wth r ate indicas tha  the nber of r ac T r o te t um e ti ve  surf ce  sites  rins  constant  dur  tungsten nitr deosi a ema ing ide p tion.  he constant g wth r ate also ar es tha  the tungsten nitr T r o gu t ide f ilms ar  g r owing with no surf rughening . e ace o

The  ellipsometr   measurments  of  the  tungsten  nitr lm ic e ide  f i thicness deosited b  thre  AB reaction c cles k p y e y vs. substr te tem a -per atur e ar displa ed in F g . 9.  he  WF e y i T 6 and NH 3 r eactant eoxp sur es a eac tempertur e wer e suf icient f  complete half-r tions t h a f or eac and ad ditional r ctant eosur e rsulted in no fur de osition. ea xp e the p The solid line connects the dants,d the er r bar rpr esent ta poi an r o s e the 90% conf dence limits. F r e 9 sho s tha t the tungsten nitr i igu w ide

Figur e 9. Ellipsometr c measurments of the tungsten nitrm thic ness i e ide f l i k deposited  b   thr e  AB  cycles  a   vr ious  substr e  temper turs.  Reactant y e t a at a e exposur es w er e suf icient f  complete half-r tions aeac  tempertur e. f or eac t h a

<!-- image -->

f ilm thic ness deosited b  thre  AB cycles incrses r pidl with k p y e ea a y substr te temper tur e fr m 400 to 600 K. In this temperrgime, a a o atur e e the FTIR spectr cop y measur ements indica tha  the surf halfos te t ace r eactions do not pr ed to completion and ma r oduce a  F oce y p W 6 :NH 3 adduct species.

After the r id rse ap i vs. temper atur e fr m 400 to 600 K, he tung o t -sten nitr e f lm thic ness deosited b  3 B cycles incrses onl id i k p y A ea y ver y slightl fr substre temper tur es betwen 600-800 K.  hese y o at a e T temper atur es ar  suf icient f  complete half-r tions accor ng to e f or eac di the FTIR vibrional studies.  near y constant tungsten nitr at The l ide deposition r e of 2.5 Å/AB c ycle f r temper tur es betwen 600 at , o a e and 800 K is consistent with the thic f a N monolayer . kness o W 2

The surf ce topor aphy of the de sited tungsten nitr f lms a g po ide i w as eamined with an amic fr ce micrscope (AFM) oper ting in x to o o a ta pping mode (Dig tal Instrnts-Nanoscope III). F r e 10 sho s i ume igu w a 3.0 b  3.0 m scan of a  350 Å thic  tungsten nitr  f lm de y m , k ide i -posited b  140 B cycles a  600 K.  he ractant eosur es w er e suf y A t T e xp -f icient f   both  half-r tions to r h completion f  all 140 or eac eac or AB cycles.  he light-to-daray scale in F 10 spans less than 25 Å. T k g ig .

The  AFM ima ges of the de sited tungsten nitr f lms ehibit po ide i x a surf ce rughness of 6.1 Å (r ot-mean-squar ). In comparon, a o 6 o e is the  surfe  rughness  of  the  initial  SiOce  on  Si(100)  w ac o 2 surf a as 6 2.5 Å. he po w er spectr density of the surf ughness also T al ace r o exhibited the same staical c acterstics as the initial SiO tist har i 2 sur f ace on Si(100). This smooth surf e topor aphy with a r ghness 10 ac g ou comparable to the initial surf dica es tha  the tungsten nitr ace in t t ide f ilms ar  g r owing with ne ligb le r ughening . e g i o

The tungsten nitr  f lm composition w ealua ted using X-r ide i as v ay photoelectr spectr scop y (XPS) deth-prf iling The XPS de pthon o p o . a pr of iling eer iments emploed a 4 kV xp y Ar 1 ion beam oper ting with a a 10 mA/cm 2 ion cur ent to sputter slo thrugh the 350 Å thic r wly o k tungsten nitr e f lm. he surf ce of the tungsten nitrm ehib d i T a ide f l i x ited c ar acterstic signals f ,C, N ,F,and O a toms. fter se er al h i or  W A v minutes of sputter  thr ugh the surf e r gion, the elemental con ing o ac e -centrtions in the b  tungsten nitr  f lm w er e constant until en a ulk ide i -counterng the under ing SiO f ilm. i l y 2

The XPS de pth-prf iling rults r ealed tha  the bk tungsten o es ev t ul nitrde f lms had a to N r atio of  3:1. he flms also contained i i W , T i small aomic per enta ge concentr tions of  5% C and t c a , , 3.6% O. These impurties ma  be atrb uted to CO dissocian r sulting fr i y t i tio e om the CO parial prsur es in our dif ion-pumped centr  deosition t es fus al p a These eper iments w er e perf r med by Eli Maee va of the Der tment of Metallur x o t pa -gical and Ma er ials Eng neerng a the Color o Sc hool of Mines. t i i t ad

Figur e 10. AFM ima ge of a 350 Å thic ungsten nitr  f lm deosited a k t ide i p t 600 K after 140 cycles on a 125 Å thic iO 2 AB k S f ilm on Si(100).  rac The e tant e posur es of 12,000 L NH and 4300 L  F x 3 W 6 w er e suf icient f  complete f or half-r actions durg eac  AB cycle . he light-to-darnge is 25 Å. e in h T k r a

<!-- image -->

chamber. 34 Alter natiel y,the impurties ma  rsult fr  ar tifcts en v i y e om a -counterd dur ing r e A 1 sputter ng of metal and metal nitrms. 5 i ide f l i 3 The lar e  W g :N r atio ma r esult fr  the pr f er ential r o val of N y om e em atoms b y  Ar 1 sputter ng tha  is often obserfr metal nitrs. i t ved o ide 35

Glancing angle XRD e per iments w er e also perfed to ealu x or m v ate the cr tallo r aphic strtur of the tungsten nitr lms. [See ys g uc e ide f i f ootnote on the prious pae.] Using Cu Kr adia tion incident a a ev g a t 4 ,the tungsten nitr  f lms displad seer al dif r action peaks a 8 ide i ye v f t angles 2 equal to 37, 3,and 63.  The most dominant peak w u 4 8 as obser ved  a t  37 .  These  dif action  peaks  ar consistent  with  the half-r action, he F 8 fr e (111),(200),(220)  r f lections  of  cubic . 6,37 e W 2 N 3 The  estima ed t gr ain siz  of the N cr ystallites deter d frm the width of the e W 2 mine o (111) dif r action peak w f as , 110 Å.

with the g wth of F r o W x * surf ace coer age.  his symmetr betw een v T y loss and g in sugests thaboth the half-r ions occur in an a a g t eact ppr oximatel 1:1 f shion.  he NH y a T 3 r eactant consumes  * surf ace WF x species and de sits NH surf ace species.  e  WF po 2 * Th 6 r eactant con -sumes NH 2 * surf ace species and deits  F pos W x * surf ace species.

The adhesion of the tungsten f to the star SiOsurf ace ilms ting 2 w as  qualita el y  e xamined  with  the dhesie  tae  test'r oceti v 'a v p p dur e. 8 3 The tungsten nitr  f lms sur i ved the test with no ece ide i v viden of delamina ion.  he rsistity of the tungsten nitr ms w as also t T e v ide f l i deterined using a f r -point pre a ppar atus with silvpaint elec m ou ob er -tr ical contacts. he measur ed rsistity ws 4500 m 39 T e v a V cm.

## Discussion

Surf ace  cemistr of tungsten nitrdeosition. h y ide p -The surf ce a chemistr of tungsten nitrdeosition can be studied bitor y ide  p y mon -ing the vibr ional aor ption f atur es of the NHand  WF at bs e y * x * surf ace species. e N-H Th y vibr ational str hing r gion of the infr  spec e c e ar ed -tr a e hibits signif nt c anges with rction temperur e. t 700 K, x ica h ea at A the N-H strtc hing r gion ehibited twshar f eatur es a 3435 and y e e x o p t 3515  cm 2 1 tha t  ar   assigned  to  the  asymmetr and  symmetr c e ic i strtc hing modes of NH surf ace species.  e N-H e 2 * Th y bending r gion e displaed a strg peak a  1550 cm 1 y on t 2 tha t is arb uted to the N-H tti 2 scissor  mode. 29,30 The fr quencies of these thr odes ar  consis s e ee m e -tent with NHsurf ace species with throorina te N aoms (W2 * ee-c d t NH 2 ). 9,30 2 A small peak also aar ed a t  1485  cm 1 ppe 2 tha t  can  be assigned to f r -coor dina te surfe N aoms (W 2 ou ac t -NH 2 ). 9,30 2

Reduction of the r tion temper ur e to 600 K r ulted in se eac at es ver al ne spectrl f atur es tha  ar  shon in Fg . 3 and 4. In adon to w a e t e w i diti the 3435 and 3515 cmf eatur es obser ed a t 700 K,he N-H strtc h2 1 v t 2 e ing  r gion  also  displatw o  ne w  f eatur es  loca ed  a  3350and e ys t t 3290 cm 2 1 . In adtion to the 1550 cm eak obser ed a t 700 K,he di 2 1 p v t N-H y bending r gion also r eals a pr inent 1485 cm 1 e ev om 2 f ea tur and e a weak 1610 cm 1 2 f ea tur. he ad ditional infr fatur es a 600 K e T ar ed e t ar e a ttr b uted to NH surfce species with fcoor dina te N aoms i 2 * a our t (W 2 -NH 2 ). 9,30 2 These fur -coor dina te surfe N aoms e xist tother o ac t ge with the thr -coorina te surfe N aoms. he 1610 cm ee d ac t T 2 1 f ea tur is e attrb uted to a small NH urfce coer age. 9-31 i 3 * s a v 2

Further c anges in the N-Htrtc hing and bending rons occur h y s e egi w hen the rction temperur e is lo er ed to 500 K.  e thr e-coor ea at w Th e -dina te N-H 2 strtc hing and bending modes arear y e xtinguished e e n l at 3515,435,and 1550 cm 3 2 1 . In ad ition, he f ur -coorina te N-H d t o d 2 strtc hing  and  bending  modes  ar peristent  a3350, 3290, and e e s t 1485 cm 2 1 .  Tw o  prminent  spectr  f atur es  ar   also  obser d  a t o al e e ve 3455 and 1610 cm 1 .  hese ne f eatur es ar a ttrb uted to molecu 2 T w e i -lar NH 3 * surf ace species. 31 29The pr esence of molecular NH sur 3 * f ace species maindica e the f ma tion of an  :NH y t or WF x 3 adduct.  his T adduct has been obser earier w en using  F ved l h W 6 and NH 3 r eac tants. Tungsten nitr e f lms tha  hae incor or ated the 20 id i t v p WF x :NH 3 adduct ehibit poor adhesion and electrr per ties. x ical p o 20

The W -F x strtc hing  vibr tion  in  F .  3  and  4  is  obsera t e a ig ved , 680 cm 2 1 .  T his vibrional f tur e e xhibited onlsubtle c nges at ea y ha with raction temperur e. he  W -F e at T x strtc hing mode br adened and e o shifted to slightlher fr uencies as the r tion temperur e was y  ig eq eac at lo w er ed fr m 700 to 500 K. is fr quenc y shift mabe consistent o Th e y with a higher co age of surf e fuor ine species a loer raction ver ac l t  w e temper atur es.

An anal ysis  of  the  nor iz ed  inte r ated  asorbance  da a  pr mal g b t e sented in F . 5 yields ad ional details a  the r ctions a600 K. ig dit bout ea t In F ig . 5a,oss of l WF x * surf ace coer age durng the NHhalf-r ac v i 3 e tion is coincident with the g  NH * surfce coer age. Lik wise , ain of 2 a v e the loss of NH surf ace coer age in F g . 5b is als concur ent 2 * v i w ay r

The FTIR spectr  ar consistent with self-limiting surf a e ace c hem istr  and the amic la er contr lled g owth of tungsten nitr  he y to y o r ide .T FTIR  spectr   do  displasome  temper tur e  de pendence  tha   ma y a y a t af f ect  the  de sited  fm  stoicometr y. t  700  K  dur ng  the  NH po il hi A i 3 e t W x * surfce coer age initiall ecrases with v y a v y d e er little cor ponding incrse in the NH surf ace coer age. his ob r es ea 2 * v T -ser vation sug ests thaeac NH g t h 3 molecule can rct initiall ith ea y w m ultiple  * surf ace species a 700 K. Dur ng the WF x t i WF 6 half-r ac e tion a  700 K, the loss of NH surfce coer age and gin of  F t 2 * a v a W x * surf ace  coer age  ar  symmetr ical  and  similar  to  the  behab v e vior oser ved a t 600 K.

W hen the rction temperur e is lo er ed to 500 K, he NH 3 ea at w t pr ecur sor cannot r ct with all of the  surfce species.  is NH 3 ea WF x * a Th half-r action sar ates after rving onl  ~60 % of the initial e tu emo y WF x * surf ace  coer age.  In  contr t, the F v as W 6 half-r action  displa v er y e ys symmetrical beha ior a  500 K. e loss of N-H bsorbance f atur es v t Th y a e and g ain of -F W x absorbance f atur es ar  in c ose corspondence . e e l r e

The tempertur e de pendence of the NH half-r action sugsts a 3 e ge tha t the N content of the de ed tungsten nitr f lms ma y c hange posit ide  i with raction temperur e.  A lo w er N content mabe obser ed a t e at y v 700 K because eacNH 3 h molecule can initiall ct with m ltiple y r ea u WF x * surf ace species. s pr diction is consistent with other studies Thi e tha t  obser e  lo er  N  concentrions  in  tungsten  nitr lms  de v w at ide  f i -posited a  higher r ction temperur es. 9,36,37 Likewise ,a lo er N t ea at 1 w content ma also be measur  a t 500 K because the NH alf-r ac y ed 3 h e tion does not pr ed to completion. se prdictions should be oce The e tested b  e valua ting the stoic metr y of tungsten nitrf lms de y hio ide i -posited a  difr ent substr e temper tur es. t f e at a

Tungsten nitr e f lm gowth on Si(100). id i r - Figur es 6 and 7 demon -strte the self-limiting na f the NHand  WF a tur e o 3 6 half-r actions a e t 600 K. hese rsults r eal tha  NH 3 T e ev t exposur es of 10,000 L and WF 6 exposur es of 3000 L ar needed f r complete surf half-r ctions e o ace ea at 600 K. Using sa ation e posur es of NH and  WF tur x 3 6 ,the deosited p tungsten  nitr  thicess de kn vs. number  of  AB  reaction  cles  w as yc examined  in  F g .  8.  he  flm  gowth  was  etr emely  linear  with  a i T i r x tungsten nitr e deosition r e of 2.55 Å/AB c le . d p at yc

The linear g wth obsered in F g . 8 indica s tha  the tungsten r o v i te t nitrde f lms  ar   g r owing  v er y  smoothl  on  the  Si(100)  substr i i e y ate . The  AFM ima ge in F g . 10 conf ms the de osition of v  smooth i ir p er y and unif r m  tungsten  nitr  f lms. he  surf ce  rughness  of  this o de i T a o tungsten nitr e f lm is onl 6.1 Å (r ot-mean-squar ). he slight d i y 6 o e T r oughness of this f  ma y be atrb uted in parto the prnce of ilm t i t ese small tungsten nitrcr stallites. ide  y

Figur e 9 r veals thathe tungsten nitr deosition is v  con e t ide  p er y stant  f  temper tur es or a $ 600  K.  This  constant  deition  r e pos at vs. temper atur e was not obser d in earer studies of  3 ve li Al 2 O and SiO 2 atomic la er contr lled g owth. y o r 10,11 This ear ier temper ur e de penl at dence w as atrb uted to the loss of h yl goups on l 2 O t i ydr ox r A 3 and SiO 2 by deh ydr oxyla tion. 40,41 The constant tungsten nitreosi ide dp tion r te a vs. temper atur e may rsult fr  the higher ther staili e om mal b -ty of the  * and NH 2 WF x * surf ace species. If the  and NH 2 WF x * * sur f ace  coer ages  rmain  constant  a 600  K, the  same  n mber  of v e t $ u tungsten and nitr n a toms should be de sited eac AB cycle . oge po h

The spectr scopic ellipsometrmeasurments deter ined tha o ic e m t the r al and ima inar r efr actie inde ( e g y v x ñ 5 n 1 ik ) v ar ied with f m il thicness.  he rfr actie inde was k T e v x n 5 2.2 6 0.6 and k 5 0.7 6 0.3 at l 5 632 nm f or a 45 Å thicungsten nitr  f lm. he rfr actie k t ide i T e v inde x was n 5 3.29 6 0.35 and k 5 1.78 6 0.27 a t l 5 632 nm f or a 275 Å thicf ilm. ungsten nitr e f lm thic nesses 275 Å rsult k T id i k $ e -ed in no fur er c ange in the r actie inde. th h f v x

The c hanging rfr actie inde with f lm thic ness ma y simpl e v x i k y result fr  the eolution of the electrband str tur e with f lm om v onic uc i thic kness. he  flm  composition  is  not  belie o  v r y T i ved  t a vs. f ilm

thic kness because the tungsten nitrosition r e per  cycle ide de p at AB remained  constant  f ilm  thic ness. he  measur ed  optical  con vs. k T -stants f the thic tungsten nitr  f lms  275 Å ar consistent or k ide i $ e with tungsten nitr  f lms tha  hae a  :N r atio betw en 2:1 and ide i t v W e 1:1. 2 4 Tungsten  nitr e  f lms  thicr  than 500  Å  could  not  be id i ke , measured using ellipsometr ecause of str  light a or ption b y b ong bs y the metallic f . ilm

## Ac knowledgments

Tungsten nitr e f lms commonl y e xist as N or N with a 2:1 id i W 2 W or 1:1  /N stoic hiometr y. W 36 A 1:2  W/N stoic hiometr y  is  unlik el y because  the  N W 2 strctur e  is  vy  unsta le .  The  tungsten  nitr u er b ide cr ystal str tur consists of a f center cubic (fcc) subice of uc e ace d la tt W atoms. Half of the octahedrles ar flled with N as in the l ho e i tom W 2 N strctur e. ll of the octahedroles ar flled with N as in u A al h e i tom the N structur e. hese ar angements prduce a cubic cral laice W T r o yst tt f or W 2 N and a he agonal la tice strur e fr N x t uct o W . 43 The cubic cr ys tal laice f   W tt or 2 N is the most sta  strtur e and is almost al s ble uc w ay obser ved in tungsten nitrf lm g r owth studies. 0,23 The hea t of ide i 6,2 f or ma tion  of  5.3  kcal/mol  f W 2 or 2 N is slightl more e xotheric y m than the heaof f ma tion of  3.6 kcal/mol f   WN t or 2 or . 5

The XRD measurements of the tungsten nitr lms r vealed ide f i e mainl y cubic  2 N with a dominant (111) peak.  latice constant W The  t der i ved fr m the (111) peak w   2.4 Å.  his la tice constant a s o as , T t gr ee with the tungsten nitr g owth r ate of 2.55 Å/AB c le obtained ide r yc fr om the measurments shon in F ig . 8.  he g r ain sizof the tung e w T e -sten nitr e f lms w as estima ed to be  110 id i t , Å fr om the (111) dif -fr action peak.  ese X-ry r esults indicatha  the tungsten nitr Th a te t ide f ilms  hae  not  de eloped  a  lar   g r ain  cr stalliz  str ctur.  The v v ge y ed u e AFM measur ements shon in F ig . 10 ma be obser ing some small w y v cr ystallites on the tungsten nitr ce tha  ar  consistent with the ide surf a t e XRD  r esults.  Small  cr alline  gns  ar   commonly  obsered  in yst r ai e v tungsten nitr e f lms g own at lo  temper atur e. d i r w 2,6

This w or k  was  suppor ed  in  parb  Ad vanced  Micr  Devices t t  y o thr ough a g aduate student foship fr JW.K. d ditional suppor r ellw o . A t w as rcei ved fr m the ir F or ce Of f ice of Scientifesear h. Some e o A ic R c of the equipment utiliz n this in tig tion ws prvided b eari ed i ves a a o y l er suppor   fr m  the  Of ice  of  Na al  Resear h.  The  author   thank t o v c s Dr.Tom Seidel of Gen s,Inc ., in Sunnvale ,CA, f or motiating this u y v r esearh and contr uting man helpful sug stions. c ib y ge

The Uni ver sity of Color a t Boulder assisted in meeting the pub ado lica -tion costs of this ar tice . l

## References

- 1. The  National echnolo gy  Roadmap  fr  Semiconductor T o s , SIA  Semiconductor Industr   Associa tion,an J ose ,CA (1997). y S
- 2. M. Takeyama and  A. Noya, Jpn. J ppl. Phs .A y ., 36 ,2261 (1997).
- 3. U . Masaki,. akeo,M. Masanori, T. Ka tsumi, Y. Sadae N . adashi,nd O. omo O T , T a T hir o, Thin Solid Fms il , 286 ,170 (1996).
- 4. T. Ma yumi and N . tsushi, A Jpn. J ppl. Phs .A y ., 36 ,2261 (1997).
- 5. M. Uekubo,T. Oku, K. Nii,. Murakami,K.  Takahir,S. ama guchi, T. Nakano, M o Y and  T.Ohta, Thin Solid Fms il , 286 ,170 (1996).
- 6. B . Pr k,D . K o,Y. Kim, J. Ha, Y. Pr k,S. LeeH. Lee ,M. Lee,U . Chung ,Y. K oh, a a , and M. Lee , J. ppl. Ma ter A . , 26 ,L1 (1997).
- 7. S. M. Geore,A.  W . Ott, nd J .  . Klaus, g a W J. Ph ys. Chem ., 100 ,13121 (1996).
- 8. C. H. L. Goodman and M.  P essa, V. J. ppl. Phs A y ., 60 ,R65 (1986).
- 9. T. Suntola, Thin Solid Fms il , 216 ,84 (1992).
- 10. A.  W . Ott, .  . Klaus, . M. J hnson,and S . M. Geore, J W J o g Thin Solid Fms il , 292 , 135 (1996).
- 11. J.  . Klaus, .  W . Ott, . M. J hnson, and S . M. Geore, W A J o g Appl. Phs. Lett y ., 70 ,1092 (1997).
- 12. J.  . Klaus,. Sneh, and S . M. Geore, W O g Science , 278 ,1934 (1997).
- 13. H. Kuma gai, K.  Toyoda,K. Kobayashi, M. Obara,and  Y. Iimr a, u Appl. Phs. Lett. y , 70 ,2338 (1997).
- 14. K. Kukli, J. Ihan s,M. Ritala, nd M. Leskla, u a e Appl. Phs. Lett. y , 68 ,3737 (1996).

The  3:1 /N  stoic hiometr y  deter ined  b y  the  XPS  sputter W m depth-prf iling  measurents  is  in  disament  with  the  XRD o em gr ee anal ysis thaindicad a  2 N f ilm stoicometr y. Similar disa et te W hi gr e ment has been obser d in other tungsten nitrm g r owth stud ve ide f l i -ies. 9,37 1 These studies haalso obser d  W ve ve 2 N by XRD and measur ed either higher or lo /N stoic hiometr y b y  Ar w er  W 1 sputter pr of iling . 19,37 Ar 1 ion beam sputter g usuallr esults  in  pr r ential in y ef e r emo val of N ams tha yields ar ciallhigh  :N r atios. Extr a to t tif i y W 35 N atoms ar also belie to e ist a  gain boundar es betw en tung e ved x t r i e -sten nitr e cr stallites.These etr a N a toms a t the g in bound id y 2,37 x r a -ar ies ar  not obserd b y the XRD eper iment and ma contr b ute to e ve x y i a lo er  :N r atio measur d durng sputter de-prf iling w W e i pth o .

## Conc lusions

- 15. J.  W .  Klaus,.  W .  Ott, .  Dillon,nd  S .  M.  Geore, A A a g Surf .  Sci.  Lett ., 418 ,L14 (1998).
- 16. M. Han,Y. Luo, J. E. Mor l, J. G . Chen, and R. M. Osgod, y o Surf . Sci ., 415 ,251 (1998).
- 17. M. Ishii,. Iw ai, H. Kaw ata, T. Ueki,nd  Y. o yagi, S a A J. Cr yst. Gr wth o , 180 ,15 (1997).
- 18. J.  . Klaus,. J F er r o,and S . M. Geore, W S . g Thin Solid Fms il ,In prss (2000). e
- 19. S. Mar cus and R. Fter os , Thin Solid Fms il , 236 ,330 (1993).
- 20. T.  Nakajima, K. W atana be, and  N.  W atana be, J.  Electr hem.  Soc . oc , 134 , 3175 (1987).
- 21. C. Meunier ,C. Monteil, . Sa vall,. Plmino, J.  eber ,R. Berjoan, nd J . Durnd, C F a W a a Appl. SurfSci. . , 125 ,313 (1998).
- 22. C.  W . LeeY. . Kim, and S . K. Min, , T Appl. Phs Lett y ., 62 ,3312 (1993).
- 23. Y.  T. Kim and S  K. Min, . Appl. Phs. Lett y ., 59 ,929 (1991).
- 24. A. C. Dillon, B. Robinson,.  Y. Han, and S . M. Geore, M. M g J. Electr hem. Soc oc ., 139 ,537 (1992).
- 25. P. Basu, T. H. Ballingand J . . ates Jr er , T Y ., Rev. Sci. Instr um ., 59 ,1321 (1988).

The a tomic la er deosition of tungsten nitr ms w as demon y p ide f l i strted using self-limiting sequential surfons. ter nating a ace racti e Al exposur es of NH and  WF 3 6 in an  B AB… r A eaction sequence w e er used to de osit the tungsten nitr lms.  r ansmission FTIR spec p ide f i T -tr oscop y studies indica  tha  the NH and  WF ted t 3 6 surf ace ractions e w er e complete and self-limiting a00 K. T $ 6 In situ spectrscopic o ellipsometr measur ements  deter ined  tha  the  tungsten  nitr y m t ide gr owth  per B  cycle  w as  etr emely  linear  with  g th  rtes  of A x r ow a , 2.5Å/AB cycle a 600-800 K. t

- 26. O . Sneh, M. L. W ise ,A.  W . Ott, .  A. Okada,and S . M. Geore, L g Surf . Sci ., 334 , 135 (1995).
- 27. J. R. Cr ighton, e J. ac. Sci, echnol. V T A , 7 ,621 (1989).
- 28. N . K obayashi, Y.  Nakamur a,H.  Goto,and  Y.  Homma, J.  A ppl.  Phs y ., 73 ,4637 (1993).
- 29. M. Bar tr am, T. Mic halsk e,J. Ro ger s,and  T. Ma yer , Chem. Mater ., ,953 (1991). 3
- 30. D . Berolet and J Ro ger s, t . Chem. Mater ., ,391 (1993). 5
- 31. K. Nakamoto, Infrred Spectr  of Inornic and Coor ina tion Compounds a a ga d ,W iley IntercienceNew Yor k (1970). s ,
- 32. G . E. Jlison, r ., el J Thin Solid Fms il , 234 ,416 (1993).
- 33. Guide to Using  ASE32 WV ,J.A.  oollam Co.,nc ., Lincoln, NE 6850 (1994). W I
- 34. E. Umbach and D . Menz el, Surf . Sci ., 135 ,199 (1983).
- 35. S. Ing ey,M. J ohnson,R. Str aterand S . G ., r e , J. ac. Sci.  chnol. V Te , 20 ,968 (1982).
- 36. . , J. Ma ter Res . ., ,1353 (1993). 8
- 37. M. Tsai, S. Sun, H. Chiu, and S . Chuang , Appl. Phs. Lett y ., 68 ,1412 (1996).
- 38. B . N . Cha pman, J. ac. Sci.  chnol. V Te , 11 ,106 (1974).
- 49. I. B aldes, .V Proc. Inst. Radio Eng rs. , 42 ,420 (1954).
- 40. A.  W . Ott, . C. McCar le y,J.  . Klaus, . D .  ay,and S . M. Geore, K W J W g Appl. Surf . Sci. , 107 ,128 (1996).
- 41. O . Sneh and SM. Geore, . g J. Ph ys. Chem. , 99 ,4639 (1994).
- 42. P. BoherP. Houd y,P. Kaikai, and L. J  an Ijz ndoor n, , t .V e J. ac. Sci.  chnol. V Te A , 8 , 846 (1989).
- 43. Interational  ables f r X-Ra y Cr ystallo raphy n T o g ,D . Reidel, ordr echt (1983). D

AFM ima ges rvealed tha  the desited tungsten nitr f lms e t po ide i w er e  e ceptionall fa t with a r ghness similar to the initial sur H.  T. Chiu and S  H. Chuang x y  l ou -f ace . XRD e xper iments r vealed the f ms consisted of small e il W 2 N cr ystallites with a diameter  Å and a pr er r ed (111) ornta , 110 ef ie -tion. XPS de th-prf iling measurents of the tungsten nitrms p o em ide f l i obser ved onl lo C, O ,and F impurty concentr ions.  he a tomic y w i at T la yer deosition of smooth tungsten nitr ms should f d man y p ide f l i in applicaions and ma  be par icular  impor tant as a dif ion barer t y t l y fus r i f or Cu on contact and via holes.